---
---

## Tags

#history

## Content

First Prime Minister of Russia, succeeded by Ivan Goremykin, who was later quickly replaced by [Pyotr-Stolypin](Pyotr-Stolypin)

### How significant was Sergei Witte for Russia up to 1914?

> Paper four question

As the first Prime Minister of Russia, Sergei Witte played an important role in Russia as both a source of reforms and a supporter of the Tsarist regime. To assess the significance of Sergei Witte, a comparison between him and one of his successors, [Stolypin](Pyotr-Stolypin), could be used. Stolypin took the place of Witte’s successor and continued on many policies of Witte. Points are separated into categories including economic, political, and social influences.

Firstly, one of the biggest influences that Witte had on Russia was his push for industrialization. From 1890 to 1914, capital investment, the money used to buy technology and tools used in production, rose by more than 20%. As a result, coal production doubled, and other outputs also increased by great amounts. Since Russia did not previously own the high-skilled labour and technology required to achieve quick industrialization, he encouraged foreign skills to migrate into Russia. Foreign investments were also encouraged. He was also the first to stabilize the ruble to achieve these foreign trades. With experience as the Transport Minister, he also encouraged government stimulus in railway: the government bought large amounts of previously private-owned railways. In general, these reforms that he has brought upon Russia greatly improved its economy. In fact, after the war, Witte played a major role in restabilizing the economy from the revolution through negotiations with European banks, successfully acquiring loans that restored businesses. However, generally, the effect of these improvements is not as compelling: it had little effect on the lives of the peasants, perhaps even the workers. Little legislation was passed to protect their rights, as labour is always the biggest cost of production: it was against the interests of industries to do so. The peasants saw no big change before and after the 1905 revolution, nor under Witte. He was not interested in agriculture at all. In comparison, industries only accounted for 30% of the total Russian output, so the efficiencies of industrialization lacked potential for agriculture. Besides, Russia did not have the amount of capital and funds needed to achieve rapid growth in industry as Britain and the US had. The investments also backfired: many output produced in Russia were drained back to foreign investments, and Russian firms became crippled when the money did outflow. Russia became exploited by foreign investments. Some measures were used to protect local industries, for instance, the high tariffs, but it resulted in reduced standards of living, and costs of necessities rose.

On the other hand, as a successor to Witte, Stolypin did quite well in terms of agricultural improvements. He first continued industrialization as passed on from Witte, but most of his focus was on agriculture. He allowed peasants to buy and own land, gave subsidies, established banks, and a commission was set up to supervise and implement these changes. In return, the productivity in the agricultural sector grew by 14%, and 25% in Siberia. Economically, this brought benefits to more people when compared to Witte’s industrialization as the latter could not redistribute the gains made from the process. And, when including the fact that Russia was still an agricultural country at the time, these policies were the real game-changers. Despite the scale of changes brought to Russia by Witte, the policies of Stolypin, when given enough time, would have increased the general real income level and standards per capita.

Politically, the biggest changes that Witte brought took place during the 1905 revolution. He first negotiated the treaty with Japan, allowing the Tsar to withdraw the troops back to St. Petersburg. This was one of the key factors in stopping the revolution as the troops played an important role in confronting the Social Revolutionaries. He then persuaded the Tsar to publish the October Manifesto, which the Tsar heavily disliked, and allowed the Liberals to suspend their participation in the rebellion. This use of the disunity between the opposition groups further weakened the revolution, allowing the Tsarist regime to survive. As a side effect, the Duma was introduced in the Manifesto. This was the first instance of democracy happening in the autocracy, no matter whether if the Duma had any actual powers: it satisfied the middle classes. However, Witte resigned before the Duma was elected, and the first two Dumas were quickly dissolved by Stolypin, proving that it was just a puppet to entertain the people. Finally, to end the 1905 revolution, he used his power as the prime minister to suppress all social unrest close to the end of the revolution, whether it was soviet councils, mutinies, strikes, and uprisings. In summary, Witte was mainly important in the survival of the government during the 1905 revolution, but apart from 1905, his influence was minimal.

In contrast, Stolypin had a much bigger political influence. He was a conservative in terms of his opinions on the Tsarist regime, but he brought forth some rather aggressive policies when it comes to opposition. Despite that the October Manifesto stated that people had political rights, he still used the police and army to crush opposition. Fast trials were introduced, and people who opposed the Tsar were quickly sentenced to be hanged. Hence comes the nickname “Stolypin’s necktie.” Martial law was also fully utilized by Stolypin. He also controlled the Duma, making it more conservative, achieving a constitutional monarchy. The first two Duma’s failure resulted in a change in election weight of the different classes, achieving the conservative Duma as mentioned. The other statements in the October Manifesto were also defied by him: the loose censorship did not take place, and gatherings of opposition groups were either quickly dismissed or never dismissed. He also took a firm point when it comes to the royal family, specifically Rasputin. The effect of Rasputin on the reputation of the nobility was disliked by Stolypin. He managed to banish him from the capital, and then later went on a trip to Jerusalem, returning after the assassination of Stolypin. Stolypin’s importance can be seen from the multiple assassination attempts on him that Witte did not possess. He had too many policies, which resulted in more opposition. Hence, when it comes to politics, Witte had no big significance, especially when compared relatively with other political figures in the regime at the same time such as Stolypin.

Witte’s industrialization brought up a group of middle classes: bankers, factory owners, professionals, etc. The class was new to Russian society, and it was a huge step forward in terms of capitalism. They were well educated, and had more radical demands in terms of politics and economy, later becoming the main pushing engine of the Liberals. However, his focus on industrialization resulted in a lack of attention on agriculture, and regular periods of famine stroked the country. The rapid rise of industries also resulted in bad conditions for the workers as the unemployment rate was large, and the cities were crowded. They had low pay due to the large working force, and there were nearly no non-pay benefits for them. As for the nobility, nothing barely changed. It is not wrong to say that Witte did not bring better living standards for the common citizens and lower classes: the middle classes were the biggest beneficiaries. However, he did not cause opposition and hatred towards the government: at least he was not a factor of it. Industrialization was still a key stage that every country has to go through to fully develop; he just brought it to Russia early.

Stolypin, however, brought great social unrest. He was seen as aggressive in character and policies, and people panicked upon his necktie that executed more than twenty-four hundred people. The lives of peasants improved: fewer taxes, surplus wealth. The peasant-owned farms slowly took place, but the transition took a long time: conservatives and landowners opposed the changes, and the effect did not reach its maximum potential before his assassination and WWI. Overpopulated regions were evacuated, and people were funded to journey into Siberia. The newly emerging class, the Kulaks, benefited the most, but the effect on other poorer peasants was minimal. Overall, he succeeded in creating progressive economic growth while not causing much opposition to the related policies. None of his successors tried to aim at increasing the lives of peasants until Khrushchev, but that is beyond the scope of the question.

Overall, Sergei Witte is quite significant in his role in the industrialization of the Russian economy before 1914. He has brought forth many economically successful policies that pushed the process much faster than if he did not exist. Also, he played a key role in the survival of the Tsar in the 1905 Revolution. Stolypin and Witte were both influential, except that these influences were perhaps in different parts of the Russian society. Without Witte, the industrialization would possibly delay more than a decade or so. The Tsarist regime could also collapse during the 1905 revolution. That being said, Witte still lacked the ability to secure his own political position, otherwise his importance could have been even greater. Therefore, I believe that Sergei Witte was quite important in Russia’s history before 1914.
